---
layout: static
title: A little about Nathan Merritt
---

Me elsewhere on the web:

 *  I co-founded [214 Software](http://twofourteen.com) with Ben Johnson - we make apps!
 *  Music I listen to: [Last.FM](http://www.last.fm/user/satH4n/) or [Spotify](http://open.spotify.com/user/1239066134)
 *  My [Facebook](http://facebook.com/gnmerritt), [Twitter](http://twitter.com/gnmerritt) and [LinkedIn](http://www.linkedin.com/profile?viewProfile=&key=25508982&trk=tab_pro)
 *  And some [movies](http://youtube.com/profile?user=satH4n) I'm [partially](http://vimeo.com/4362627) (or completely) [responsible](http://vimeo.com/22967514) for

I'm 25 years old and a 2011 graduate of [Bowdoin
College](http://bowdoin.edu) in Brunswick, Maine. I like brains,
computers and math. I'm a former [Ultimate](http://stonedclown.com)
player and I and love to ski & sail.

I currently work as a full-stack developer at TripAdvisor. I started
on the mobile team, and later worked exclusively on our iPad
application and iPad optimized website. Since then I've touched
everything from our Instant Booking checkout flows to the database
that powers our commerce analytics to that footer that spams you with
pictures of your Facebook friends.

My primary research interest is applying insights from both number
theory and modern neuroscience to machine learning. I was in charge of
the low-level motion code for the [Northern
Bites](http://robocup.bowdoin.edu/blog/) Robocup Team (Standard
Platform League), where I [used particle swarm
optimization](http://www.bowdoin.edu/student-fellowships/pdf/summer-2010/n-merritt.pdf)
to find a stable gait for the bipedal Aldebaran Nao
robot. Additionally, I worked for Bowdoin's
[NOC](http://www.bowdoin.edu/it/) and as a TA for Computer Science
101.

My PGP fingerprint is: <i>CDED 2183 76BB 8D0B EB3A 0B15 6AD5 C192 F259
6AD4</i> though I assume that if you care about such things you won't be
satisfied with that information alone...

And here's my (out of date!) [resume](/gnmerritt-resume.pdf) in case
you're interested.
